Post: quarkus.search.io series - rolling over (#1898)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2024-04-30-search-indexing-rollover.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Indexing rollover with Quarkus and Hibernate Search'
date: 2024-04-30
tags: hibernate search howto
synopsis: 'This is the first post in the series that dives into the implementation details of the search.quarkus.io application. Are you interested in near zero-downtime reindexing? Then this one is for you!'
author: markobekhta
---
:hibernate-search-version: 7.0
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/search-indexing-rollover
:hibernate-search-docs-url: https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/search/{hibernate-search-version}/reference/en-US/html_single/
:quarkus-hibernate-search-docs-url: https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-search-orm-elasticsearch

This is the first post in the series diving into the implementation details of the
link:https://github.com/quarkusio/search.quarkus.io[application] backing the guide search of
link:https://quarkus.io/guides/[quarkus.io].

> Does your application have full-text search capabilities and use Hibernate Search?
> Do you need to perform reindexing of your data while keeping your application running and producing search results?
> Look no further. In this post, we'll cover how you can approach this problem
> and solve it in practice with a few low-level APIs provided by Hibernate Search.

Reviewer: This is a good intro, but quite restrictive as not many readers of the Quarkus blog will be in this position. They may stop reading right here.

Why not something like:

```suggestion
Does your application need full-text search capabilities? Do you need to keep your application running and producing search results without any downtime, even when reindexing all your data?
Look no further. In this post, we'll cover how you can approach this problem
and solve it in practice with a few low-level APIs, provided you use Hibernate Search, be it link:{quarkus-hibernate-search-docs-url}[on top of Hibernate ORM] or https://quarkus.io/version/main/guides/hibernate-search-standalone-elasticsearch[in standalone mode].
```

> The approach suggested in this post is based on the fact that Hibernate Search is using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach suggested in this post is based on the fact that Hibernate Search uses
```

link:{hibernate-search-docs-url}#backend-elasticsearch-indexlayout[aliased indexes],
and communicates with the actual index through a read/write alias, depending on the operation it needs to perform.
For example, a search operation will be routed to a read index alias,

> while the indexing operation will be sent to a write index alias.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while an indexing operation will be sent to a write index alias.
```

image::initial-app.png[]

NOTE: This approach is implemented and successfully used in our Quarkus application that backs the guides'
search of https://quarkus.io/guides/[quarkus.io/guides/].
You can see the complete implementation here:
link:https://github.com/quarkusio/search.quarkus.io/blob/d956b6a1341d8693fa1d6b7881f3840f48bdaacd/src/main/java/io/quarkus/search/app/indexing/Rollover.java#L44-L331[rollover implementation]
and link:https://github.com/quarkusio/search.quarkus.io/blob/d956b6a1341d8693fa1d6b7881f3840f48bdaacd/src/main/java/io/quarkus/search/app/indexing/IndexingService.java#L226-L244[rollover usage].

Applications using Hibernate Search can keep their search indexes up-to-date by updating the index gradually,

> as the data on which the index documents are based is modified, providing a near real-time index synchronisation.
> On the other hand, if the search requirements allow for a delay in synchronisation

Reviewer: This is a bit complex, I'd separate the paragraphs to clarify the two ideas are separate.

```suggestion
as the data on which the index documents are based is modified, providing a near real-time index synchronisation.

On the other hand, if the search requirements allow for a delay in synchronisation
```

or the data is updated only at certain times of day, the option of mass indexing can effectively keep the indexes up-to-date.
The link:{hibernate-search-docs-url}[Hibernate Search documentation] provides more information about these approaches
and other Hibernate Search capabilities.

The application discussed in this post is using the mass indexing approach.
This means that at certain events, e.g., when a new version of the application is deployed or a scheduled time is reached,
the application has to process the documentation guides and create search index documents from them.

> Now, since we would want to keep our application providing results to any search operations and add/update documents to the indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, since we want our application to keep  providing results to any search requests while we add/update documents to the indexes,
```

> we cannot perform a simple reindex operation (purge all documents within an index and mass-index them back)

Reviewer: You're already stating this involves a purge further down.

```suggestion
we cannot perform a simple reindexing operation
```

using a link:{hibernate-search-docs-url}#search-batchindex-massindexer[mass indexer],

> or the recently added link:{quarkus-hibernate-search-docs-url}#management[management Quarkus endpoint],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or the recently added link:{quarkus-hibernate-search-docs-url}#management[management endpoint in Quarkus],
```

> as this will drop all existing documents from the index, and search operations will not be able to match them anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as these would drop all existing documents from the index before indexing them: search operations would not be able to match them anymore until reindexing finishes.
```

Instead, we can create a new index with the same schema and route any write operations to it.

image::write-app.png[]

> Since, at the moment, Hibernate Search does not provide the rollover feature out of the box

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Hibernate Search does not provide the rollover feature out of the box (https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HSEARCH-3499[yet])
```

we will need to resort to using the lower-level APIs to access the Elasticsearch client and perform the required operations ourselves.
To do so, we need to follow a few simple steps:

1. Get the mapping information for the index we want to reindex using the schema manager.
+
[source, java]
====
----
@Inject
SearchMapping searchMapping; // <1>
// ...

searchMapping.scope(MyIndexedEntity.class).schemaManager() // <2>
    .exportExpectedSchema((backendName, indexName, export) -> { // <3>

>         var createIndexRequestBody = export.extension(ElasticsearchExtension.get()).bodyParts().get(0); // <4>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        var createIndexRequestBody = export.extension(ElasticsearchExtension.get())
                .bodyParts().get(0); // <4>
```

        var mappings = createIndexRequestBody.getAsJsonObject("mappings"); // <5>
        var settings =createIndexRequestBody.getAsJsonObject("settings"); // <6>

> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    });
```

----
1. Inject `SearchMapping` somewhere in your app so that we can use it to access a schema manager.
2. Get a schema manager for the indexed entity we are interested in (`MyIndexedEntity`).
If all entities should be targeted, then `Object.class` can be used to create the scope.
3. Use the export schema API to access the mapping information.
4. Use the extension to get access to the Elasticsearch-specific `.bodyParts()` method that returns
a JSON representing the JSON HTTP body needed to create the indexes.
5. Get the mapping information for the particular index.
6. Get the settings for the particular index.
====
+
2. Get the reference to the Elasticsearch client, so we can perform API calls to the search backend cluster:
+
[source, java]
====
----
@Inject
SearchMapping searchMapping; // <1>
// ...
RestClient client = searchMapping.backend() // <2>
    .unwrap(ElasticsearchBackend.class) // <3>
    .client(RestClient.class); // <4>

> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

====
+
3. Create a new index using the OpenSearch/Elasticsearch rollover API
that would allow us to keep using the existing index for read operations,
while write operations will be sent to the new index:
+
[source, java]
====
----
@Inject
SearchMapping searchMapping; // <1>
// ...

SearchIndexedEntity<?> entity = searchMapping.indexedEntity(MyIndexedEntity.class);
var index = entity.indexManager().unwrap(ElasticsearchIndexManager.class).descriptor(); // <2>

var request = new Request("POST", "/" + index.writeName() + "/_rollover"); // <3>
var body = new JsonObject();
body.add("mappings", mappings);
body.add("settings", settings);
body.add("aliases", new JsonObject()); // <4>
request.setEntity(new StringEntity(gson.toJson(body), ContentType.APPLICATION_JSON));

var response = client.performRequest(request); // <5>
//...
----
1. Inject `SearchMapping` somewhere in your app so that we can use it to access a schema manager.
2. Get the index descriptor to get the aliases from it.
3. Start building the rollover request body using the write index alias from the index descriptor.
4. Note that we are including an empty "aliases" so that the aliases are not copied over to the new index,

> except for the write alias.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
except for the write alias (which is implicitly updated since the rollover request is targeting it directly).
```

We don't want the read alias to start pointing to the new index immediately.
5. Perform the rollover API request using the Elasticsearch REST client obtained in the previous step.
====

> With this successfully completed, we can start populating our write index. Once we are done with indexing,

Reviewer: It's probably worth reminding the reader what this was supposed to do?

```suggestion
With this successfully completed, indexes are in the state we wanted:

image::write-app.png[]

We can start populating our write index without affecting search requests.

Once we are done with indexing,
```

----
====

Where the `Rollover` class will look as follows:

[source, java]
====
----
class Rollover implements Closeable {
    public static Rollover start(SearchMapping searchMapping) {
        // initiate the rollover process by sending the _rollover request ...
        // ...
        return new Rollover( client, rolloverResponse );  // <1>
    }

    @Override
    public void close() {
        if ( !done ) { // <2>
            rollback();
        }
    }

    public void commit() {
        // send the `_aliases` request to switch to the *new* index
        // ...
        done = true;
    }

    public void rollback() {
        // send the `_aliases` request to switch to the *old* index
        // ...
        done = true;
    }
}
----
1. Keep the reference to the Elasticsearch REST client to perform API calls.
2. If we haven't successfully committed the rollover, it'll be rolled back on close.
====

Once again, for a complete working example of this rollover implementation, check out the
link:https://github.com/quarkusio/search.quarkus.io[search.quarkus.io on GitHub].

If you find this feature useful and would like to have it built-in into your Hibernate Search and Quarkus apps

> feel free to reach out to us, submit feature requests and discuss your ideas and suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feel free to reach out to us on the https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HSEARCH-3499[pending feature requests] to discuss your ideas and suggestions.
```
